0-introduction.md, before:

# Introduction



Bicycling is often considered to be a very solitary activity. But even when we are not riding intentionally in a group --- be it for a bicycle tour or as a group commute --- bicycling can still be a social experience, as it does not take place in isolation, but "in complex choreography with other multi-modal road users" [@outthere].

Compared to other modes of transportation, bicycling offers a unique combination of experiential qualities. Bicycling happens 'out there', outside of an enclosed room, which allows us to use all our senses and experience the trip and the environment with our whole body. This allows for complex interaction which would not be possible e.g. within a car. At the same time, bicycling happens at a much higher pace than walking, which limits the range of possible interactions somewhat.

The importance of bicyclists for the socio-urban landscape has been recognized by city planners and social scientists alike. Researchers like Katrina Jungnickel, Rachel Aldred, Paul McIlvenny and Justin Spinney focus on bicycling as a social practice in much of their work. But bicycling communities themselves are starting to put more emphasis on social practice as well.

The *Slow Roll* movement ^[See [http://www.slowroll.bike/](http://www.slowroll.bike/)], in analogy to the *Slow Food* movement, promotes a more conscious bicycling experience. Bicycling communities meet to ride a tour through their city, along neighbourhoods and points of interest. 'Slow Roll' means to ride at a slow pace, allowing for appreciation of the cycling experience and social interaction. *Slow Roll* was started in Detroit, MI, USA in 2010 and has since spread over 9 other cities. It is safe to assume that many more informal meet-ups of this kind are taking place in many parts of the world.

\begin{figure*}[!ht]
  \centering
  \hspace*{-31.5mm}%*
  \includegraphics[keepaspectratio,width=\paperwidth]{slowroll.jpg}
  \caption{A Slow Roll bike tour on break. Picture by Slow Roll Detroit.}
\end{figure*}

A less well-defined social phenomenon can be observed under the hashtag `#CoffeeOutside` on social media like Twitter and Instagram. On their way cycling to work, people in cities all over the world stop and meet to have a coffee outside, together. While this movement has emerged from coffee enthusiasm, many arrive to the meet-ups by bike, and the notion of togetherness and spending time outside overlap deeply into bicycling culture.

With this new appreciation for social bicycling in mind, I aim to explore a phenomenon that I call *random vélomobile formations-in-action*, which will be described further in the following section. Some research has happened touching this phenomenon, namely @esbjornsson on encounters when motorcycling, @mcilvenny on *intentional* rather than *random* vélomobile formations-in-action, and @cromwell with an urban planning approach to indirect social interaction on bikes. Yet so far no one has explored the interaction design space encompassing this phenomenon.

Commit message:

Restructure theory and related work

0-introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

<!-- Ok, what's this about? -->

Bicycling is often considered to be a very solitary activity. But even when we are not riding intentionally in a group --- be it for a bicycle tour or as a group commute --- bicycling can still be a social experience, as it does not take place in isolation, but "in complex choreography with other multi-modal road users" [@outthere].

Compared to other modes of transportation, bicycling offers a unique combination of experiential qualities. Bicycling happens 'out there', outside of an enclosed room, which allows us to use all our senses and experience the trip and the environment with our whole body. This allows for complex interaction which would not be possible e.g. within a car. At the same time, bicycling happens at a much higher pace than walking, which limits the range of possible interactions somewhat.

The importance of bicyclists for the socio-urban landscape has been recognized by city planners and social scientists alike. Researchers like Katrina Jungnickel, Rachel Aldred, Paul McIlvenny and Justin Spinney focus on bicycling as a social practice in much of their work. But bicycling communities themselves are starting to put more emphasis on social practice as well.

The *Slow Roll* movement ^[See [http://www.slowroll.bike/](http://www.slowroll.bike/)], in analogy to the *Slow Food* movement, promotes a more conscious bicycling experience. Bicycling communities meet to ride a tour through their city, along neighbourhoods and points of interest. 'Slow Roll' means to ride at a slow pace, allowing for appreciation of the cycling experience and social interaction. *Slow Roll* was started in Detroit, MI, USA in 2010 and has since spread over 9 other cities. It is safe to assume that many more informal meet-ups of this kind are taking place in many parts of the world.

\begin{figure*}[!ht]
  \centering
  \hspace*{-31.5mm}%*
  \includegraphics[keepaspectratio,width=\paperwidth]{slowroll.jpg}
  \caption{A Slow Roll bike tour on break. Picture by Slow Roll Detroit.}
\end{figure*}

A different bicycle-related social phenomenon can be observed under the hashtag `#CoffeeOutside` on social media like Twitter and Instagram. On their way cycling to work, people in cities all over the world stop and meet to have a coffee outside, together. While this movement has emerged from coffee enthusiasm, many arrive to the meet-ups by bike, and the notion of togetherness and spending time outside overlap deeply into bicycling culture.

\todo[Write about the critical mass movement]

<!-- Ok, that's nice. But what does that have to do with design? -->

But these intentional, planned interactions that happen when meeting up for a ride tell only half the story. When cyclists ride only for themselves, for example to commute or run errands, they encounter many other cyclists. Interaction takes place here as well, but in a much more subtle way. Explicit interaction, such as starting a conversation, is often unwanted and uncomfortable.

In focus of my interest are so-called *vélomobile formations-in-action*. @mcilvenny describes them with respect to the different formations a pair of cyclists can take in order to sustain a conversation. However, I claim that these formations and the processes of entering and leaving them is similarly interesting with *strangers* instead of known people. These *chance encounters* happen all the time, and the subtle interactions are numerous: For example a negotiation of pace when trying to pass another cyclist; for example a bilateral, silent appreciation of each other's choice in bicycle; for example a demonstration of physical stamina when overtaking someone else with high speed on an upward slope.
These microinteractions contribute to the total experience of every bicycle journey, and they make up one of the differences to riding the car: the opportunity to engage with the environment in a direct way.

<!-- Now we're talking. What's your role in this? -->

Designers are starting to recognise the possibilities that everyday mundane road interactions offer. The Hocman project, described by @esbjornsson, tries to create a space for interaction during brief encounters of motorcyclists; @cromwell approaches indirect social interaction on bicycles from the standpoint of urban planning and landscape architecture; @cheng research designs for co-presence in bicycling exercise; and @rowland derive guidelines for designing cycle-based interactive experiences. Looking at the numerous ways that bicyclists engage with other road users and the environment, one can see the role that interaction design can play in shaping the future socio-urban space. Even more so when cities will adapt to more and more use of walking, bicycling, and public transportation.

In order to design for bicyclists, we must find ways to identify, document, and examine their subtle interactions on the road. In this thesis project I enquire into cycle-based interactions using design experiments and different media, and suggest modes of engaging with vélomobile formations-in-action specifically. In doing so, I aim to contribute to the --- still small --- body of interaction design knowledge in this area.
