2-literature.md, before:

# Literature review

Bicycling as a social practice has so far been covered by the humanities, especially by the social sciences.
While there also exist
many studies in the area of traffic research and urban planning, most of them
seem irrelevant to my research. Lastly, there is work in the areas of architecture
and design that touches on the design space that encompasses random vélomobile formations-in-action.

## Basic concepts & terminology

When studying ad-hoc bicycling formations, one can rely on already existing scholarly terminology. The most important terms are explained in this section.

with:
  ~ Erving Goffman studied peoples' relations in the public [-@goffman]. He came to the conclusion that social interaction in the public takes either place alone or in a group. He dubbed these two constellations *single* and *with*, respectively.

mobile with:
  ~ @jensen transfers Goffman's *with* to the realm of mobility. He also acknowledges the ephemerality of (mobile) *withs*:
    “[I]n the mundane and ordinary everyday life we make multiple ‘temporary congregations’ as we are slipping in and out of different ‘mobile withs’ ... ‘Mobile withs’ might be exemplified by groups of recreational runners or cyclists” [-@jensen, p. 341].

vélomobile formations-in-action:
  ~  @mcilvenny describes formations that bicyclists can assume in order to sustain a conversation. McIlvenny captures "different vélomobile formations-in-action" using video recordings and analyses them, creating a portfolio of different formations used to sustain social interaction between two or more people on bikes. His notion of *vélomobile formations-in-action* build a solid base for the description of the phenomenon that this research proposal addresses.^[It is important to note here that 'vélomobile' does not refer to the vehicle of the same name (see [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velomobile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velomobile)), but rather to the concept of *being mobile using a bicycle* (rather than a different vehicle).]


### Place and non-place

Marc Augé coined the term 'non-place' and used it to describe spaces of transition and mobility, for example bus stops and motorways. They are places "where interactions are structured by rules not defined by the people in them" [@spinney2007]. Augé argues that "we do not find these spaces meaningful", due to their nature of fleetingness, temporality and ephemerality. Spinney opposes this assumption with respect to bicycling, as cyclists engage with their socio-urban environment in an embodied and sensory way. He offers an account of meaningful embodied experiences of non-place by means of a narrative of an imaginary bicycle ride through London. \todo[Other accounts affirm the view that bicycle transport is indeed different from non-place.]

## Social practice

A prominent research project regarding the social practice of bicycling took place during the years \todo as a joint effort of Rachel Aldred and Katrina Jungnickel [e.g. @jungnickel; @jungnickel_cyclings_2014; @aldred2010; @aldred2012; @outthere].
Cycling cultures

## A framework for social interaction and meaning-making in a vélomobile environment

While Spinney focuses on the solitary embodied experience of bicycling, @mcilvenny describes formations that bicyclists can assume in order to sustain a conversation. His work is based on Jensen's [-@jensen] 'mobile with' --- a transfer of Erving Goffman's concept of 'single' and 'with' into the realm of mobility. Jensen argues that “in the mundane and
ordinary everyday life we make multiple ‘temporary congregations’ as we are slipping in and out
of different ‘mobile withs’ ... ‘Mobile withs’ might be exemplified by groups of recreational
runners or cyclists” [-@jensen, p. 341]. McIlvenny captures "different vélomobile formations-in-action" using video recordings and analyses them, creating a portfolio of different formations used to sustain social interaction between two or more people on bikes. His notion of *vélomobile formations-in-action* build a solid base for the description of the phenomenon that this research proposal addresses. Within this framework of 'mobile with', indirect interaction and formations-in-action exists an interaction design space that is largely unexplored.

Of special relevance to my research is also the work done by Katrina Jungnickel and Rachel Aldred. Their research [e.g. @aldred2010; @aldred2012; @jungnickel_cyclings_2014] explores the cultural and societal sides of bicycling: the relationship between the riders and other riders, their ride, the environment, and the socio-political space. They give an extensive account of the diverse bicycling cultures in different British cities.

Promising seems also the notion of transferring the *flaneur* to the world of bicycling. It is approached most prominently by @flaneur, but is also adapted by @esbjornsson to motorcycling.

## Tangents to the design space

Looking at bicycling and mobility, one can see many smartphone applications that aim to enhance the ride experience. While most of them are targeted towards professional and recreational bicycling (e.g. Strava, Map My Ride, Runtastic) and some towards activism (e.g. Bikes vs. Cars, Charity Miles, Social Cyclist), it is hard to find examples that touch on sociality or serendipity in-action.

@esbjornsson describe Hocman, a mobile application that fosters interaction between motorcyclists to complement random encounters on the road. @cromwell approaches indirect social interaction between bicyclists (which include random vélomobile formations-in-action) from a perspective of landscape architecture, designing bicycle facilities to enhance the social experience of everyday bicycling. However, the interaction design space seems largely unexplored.

@rowland did this \todo

@cheng said that \todo

# Description of the phenomenon

> - How the literature leads to random velomobile formations-in-action.
> - Describe using words and images.

In focus of my research work are *random vélomobile formations-in-action* in urban bicycle traffic. Paul McIlvenny describes vélomobile formations-in-action as "specific arrangements of bodies on
bikes and configurations of a 'vélomobile with'" [-@mcilvenny]. His work focuses on two or more people on bikes *intentionally* riding together and trying to maintain a conversation. In *random* vélomobile formations-in-action, however, this intentionality is missing. Rather, these formations describe temporary arrangements of bikes and people who are most likely strangers, and just happen to ride together at the same time, at a similar pace, for part of their respective journeys. This phenomenon occurs frequently in urban bicycle traffic, yet we seldom make note of it. The following imaginary narrative describes an instance of the phenomenon:

> Johan's commute leads him from Rönneholm in Malmö to the city's university in the western harbour. Early in this journey, he passes in front of the city library on Kung Oscars väg and turns left onto Slottsgatan, which immediately overpasses Fersens bro, a slightly ascending canal bridge. While taking the left turn, Johan moves into traffic next to Marie, who was approaching from his right. At this spot, the bike lane is wide enough for the two to ride side-by-side. As they are ascending Fersens bro, they maintain more or less the same pace and stay next to each other. After the climax, the bike lane narrows down. Johan sprints forward in order to slip in the front of Marie, making space for oncoming cyclists riding into the opposite direction. They continue to ride in a formation (in line, "singled up") until Marie turns right towards Stortorget.

During their time on Fersens bro and after, Johan and Marie are in a 'vélomobile with' and form a random vélomobile formation-in-action. They negotiate their formation with respect to each others cycling abilities and the current environment, without having met each other before.

My research will be an exploration into the possibilities this phenomenon affords and can be distilled into two major questions:

1. How can we design for social interaction to take place during random encounters of bicyclists in vélomobile formations-in-action? How can this (neutral) randomness be turned into (pleasant) serendipity?
2. How can random vélomobile formations-in-action be constructively presented in order to convey a richer account of their experience?

These questions are to be approached using the following objectives:

- Describe the phenomenon at hand using both ethnographic as well as phenomenological accounts
- Explore design openings that exploit the phenomenon
- Create and execute design experiments that raise interaction design knowledge regarding the phenomenon

Commit message:

More literature, some more on planned experiments

2-literature.md, after:

# Literature review

Bicycling as a social practice has so far been covered by the humanities, especially by the social sciences.
While there also exist
many studies in the area of traffic research and urban planning, most of them
seem irrelevant to my research. Lastly, there is work in the areas of architecture
and design that touches on the design space that encompasses random vélomobile formations-in-action.

## Basic concepts & terminology

When studying ad-hoc bicycling formations, one can rely on already existing scholarly terminology. The most important terms are explained in this section.

with:
  ~ Erving Goffman studied peoples' relations in the public [-@goffman]. He came to the conclusion that social interaction in the public takes either place alone or in a group. He dubbed these two constellations *single* and *with*, respectively.

mobile with:
  ~ @jensen transfers Goffman's *with* to the realm of mobility. He also acknowledges the ephemerality of (mobile) *withs*:
    “[I]n the mundane and ordinary everyday life we make multiple ‘temporary congregations’ as we are slipping in and out of different ‘mobile withs’ ... ‘Mobile withs’ might be exemplified by groups of recreational runners or cyclists” [-@jensen, p. 341].

vélomobile formations-in-action:
  ~  @mcilvenny describes formations that bicyclists can assume in order to sustain a conversation. McIlvenny captures "different vélomobile formations-in-action" using video recordings and analyses them, creating a portfolio of different formations used to sustain social interaction between two or more people on bikes. His notion of *vélomobile formations-in-action* build a solid base for the description of the phenomenon that this research proposal addresses.^[It is important to note here that 'vélomobile' does not refer to the vehicle of the same name (see [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velomobile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velomobile)), but rather to the concept of *being mobile using a bicycle* (rather than a different vehicle).]


### Place and non-place

Marc Augé coined the term 'non-place' and used it to describe spaces of transition and mobility, for example bus stops and motorways. They are places "where interactions are structured by rules not defined by the people in them" [@spinney2007]. Augé argues that "we do not find these spaces meaningful", due to their nature of fleetingness, temporality and ephemerality. Spinney opposes this assumption with respect to bicycling, as cyclists engage with their socio-urban environment in an embodied and sensory way. He offers an account of meaningful embodied experiences of non-place by means of a narrative of an imaginary bicycle ride through London. \todo[Other accounts affirm the view that bicycle transport is indeed different from non-place.]

## Social practice

A prominent research project regarding the social practice of bicycling was taking place in four different UK cities as a joint effort of Rachel Aldred and Katrina Jungnickel [e.g. @jungnickel_cyclings_2014; @aldred2010; @aldred2012].
"Cycling Cultures", a multi-method sociological research project, yielded insights on cyclist identity, political aspects, and methodology [@jungnickel; @outthere].

## A framework for social interaction and meaning-making in a vélomobile environment

While Spinney focuses on the solitary embodied experience of bicycling, @mcilvenny describes formations that bicyclists can assume in order to sustain a conversation. His work is based on Jensen's [-@jensen] 'mobile with' --- a transfer of Erving Goffman's concept of 'single' and 'with' into the realm of mobility. Jensen argues that “in the mundane and
ordinary everyday life we make multiple ‘temporary congregations’ as we are slipping in and out
of different ‘mobile withs’ ... ‘Mobile withs’ might be exemplified by groups of recreational
runners or cyclists” [-@jensen, p. 341]. McIlvenny captures "different vélomobile formations-in-action" using video recordings and analyses them, creating a portfolio of different formations used to sustain social interaction between two or more people on bikes. His notion of *vélomobile formations-in-action* build a solid base for the description of the phenomenon that this research proposal addresses. Within this framework of 'mobile with', indirect interaction and formations-in-action exists an interaction design space that is largely unexplored.

Of special relevance to my research is also the work done by Katrina Jungnickel and Rachel Aldred. Their research [e.g. @aldred2010; @aldred2012; @jungnickel_cyclings_2014] explores the cultural and societal sides of bicycling: the relationship between the riders and other riders, their ride, the environment, and the socio-political space. They give an extensive account of the diverse bicycling cultures in different British cities.

Promising seems also the notion of transferring the *flaneur* to the world of bicycling. It is approached most prominently by @flaneur, but is also adapted by @esbjornsson to motorcycling.

## Designing for cycle-based interaction

While arguably most of the relevant literature regarding bicycling originates in the social sciences, there are some works within different areas of design that deal with bicycling or related concepts. 


Looking at bicycling and mobility, one can see many smartphone applications that aim to enhance the ride experience. While most of them are targeted towards professional and recreational bicycling (e.g. Strava, Map My Ride, Runtastic) and some towards activism (e.g. Bikes vs. Cars, Charity Miles, Social Cyclist), it is hard to find examples that touch on sociality or serendipity in-action.

\todo[MORE HERE] @esbjornsson describe Hocman, a mobile application that fosters interaction between motorcyclists to complement random encounters on the road.
Hocman creates a virtual layer on top of the motorcycling community, which allows its members to enjoy each others sociability - however, not in situ.

\todo @cromwell approaches indirect social interaction between bicyclists (which include random vélomobile formations-in-action) from a perspective of landscape architecture, designing bicycle facilities to enhance the social experience of everyday bicycling.
Cromwell finds that a main aspect to keep in mind while designing for cycle-based interaction is *speed* and *time*. He concludes that, for social interaction to take place, upward slopes are actually good - because they decrease the maximum speed of any bicyclist, thus making the difference in cycling speed smaller and allowing people to stay close to each other for a longer period. 
As a landscape architect, Cromwell aims to shape the landscape in order to better the conditions for social interaction. His work gives opportunities, but does not enforce interactions that are unwanted. This is an important aspect, as we will learn in a later chapter that the readiness for social interaction is depending on culture (and other circumstances). Designing for cycle-based interaction must acknowledge this fact.


@rowland focus on interactive experiences for cyclists. By analysing two different experiences they derive eight lessons for designing cycle-based interaction: cycling proficiency, physicality, impact of the environment, media and hardware design, collaboration, and safety.
Although both of the examined interactive experiences are solitary, most of the lessons learned are relevant for this thesis as well. Furthermore, one can derive lessons of their own concerning sociability in bicycling.

@cheng said that \todo

# Description of the phenomenon

> - How the literature leads to random velomobile formations-in-action.
> - Describe using words and images.

In focus of my research work are *random vélomobile formations-in-action* in urban bicycle traffic. Paul McIlvenny describes vélomobile formations-in-action as "specific arrangements of bodies on
bikes and configurations of a 'vélomobile with'" [-@mcilvenny]. His work focuses on two or more people on bikes *intentionally* riding together and trying to maintain a conversation. In *random* vélomobile formations-in-action, however, this intentionality is missing. Rather, these formations describe temporary arrangements of bikes and people who are most likely strangers, and just happen to ride together at the same time, at a similar pace, for part of their respective journeys. This phenomenon occurs frequently in urban bicycle traffic, yet we seldom make note of it. The following imaginary narrative describes an instance of the phenomenon:

> Johan's commute leads him from Rönneholm in Malmö to the city's university in the western harbour. Early in this journey, he passes in front of the city library on Kung Oscars väg and turns left onto Slottsgatan, which immediately overpasses Fersens bro, a slightly ascending canal bridge. While taking the left turn, Johan moves into traffic next to Marie, who was approaching from his right. At this spot, the bike lane is wide enough for the two to ride side-by-side. As they are ascending Fersens bro, they maintain more or less the same pace and stay next to each other. After the climax, the bike lane narrows down. Johan sprints forward in order to slip in the front of Marie, making space for oncoming cyclists riding into the opposite direction. They continue to ride in a formation (in line, "singled up") until Marie turns right towards Stortorget.

During their time on Fersens bro and after, Johan and Marie are in a 'vélomobile with' and form a random vélomobile formation-in-action. They negotiate their formation with respect to each others cycling abilities and the current environment, without having met each other before.

My research will be an exploration into the possibilities this phenomenon affords and can be distilled into two major questions:

1. How can we design for social interaction to take place during random encounters of bicyclists in vélomobile formations-in-action? How can this (neutral) randomness be turned into (pleasant) serendipity?
2. How can random vélomobile formations-in-action be constructively presented in order to convey a richer account of their experience?

These questions are to be approached using the following objectives:

- Describe the phenomenon at hand using both ethnographic as well as phenomenological accounts
- Explore design openings that exploit the phenomenon
- Create and execute design experiments that raise interaction design knowledge regarding the phenomenon
